CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

Thanks for your interest. Below is an informal spec of how the plugin's server communicates with the actual compiler. If you're a ReScript editor plugin implementor, you should probably read this to understand the various important nuances and copy it.

## Repo Structure

```
.
├── client // Language Client. VSCode UI
│   └── src
│       └── extension.ts // Language Client entry point
├── analysis // Native binary powering hover, autocomplete, etc.
│   ├── src
│   └── rescript-editor-analysis.exe // Dev-time analysis binary
├── package.json // The extension manifest
└── server // Language Server. Usable standalone
    ├── src
    │   ├── server.ts // Language Server Module
    │   ├── cli.ts // LSP CLI
    └── analysis_binaries // Prod-time platform-specific analysis binaries
        ├── darwin
        ├── linux
        └── win32
```

## Install Dependencies

- Run `npm install` at the root. This will also install the npm modules for both the `client` and `server` folders.

## Analysis Binary

This is needed for the `analysis` folder, which is native code.

```sh
# If you haven't created the switch, do it. OPAM(https://opam.ocaml.org)
opam switch 4.14.0 # can also create local switch with opam switch create . 4.14.0

# Install dev dependencies from OPAM
opam install . --deps-only

# For IDE support, install the OCaml language server
opam install ocaml-lsp-server
```

## Build & Run

- `npm run compile`. You don't need this if you're developing this repo in VSCode. The compilation happens automatically in the background.
- `cd analysis && make`.

## Test

- Open VS Code to the project root.
- Switch to the Debug viewlet (command palette -> View: Show Run and Debug).
- Select `Client + Server` from the drop down, launch it (green arrow):

  <img width="235" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1909539/97448097-7d186a80-18ed-11eb-82d6-d55b70f54811.png">

  If you're getting some Promise-related error alert: this is a VSCode and/or template bug.

  - If that newly launched VSCode test instance has no project in its explorer view, drag in a random project.
  - Kill all your node processes.
  - Redo the launch.

- In the [Extension Development Host] instance of VSCode that just opened, open a `.res` file.
- Try various features.
- When you make a change, Go to the same Debug viewlet's Call Stack panel and restart the client and the server:

  <img width="359" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1909539/97448639-19db0800-18ee-11eb-875a-d17cd1b141d1.png">

- For the native analysis binary tests: `cd analysis && make test`.

## Change the Grammar

The _real_ source of truth for our grammar is at https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-sublime. We port that `sublime-syntax` grammar over to this weaker TextMate language grammar for VSCode and the rest. There are some subtle differences between the 2 grammars; currently we manually sync between them.

- Modify `grammars/rescript.tmLanguage.json`.

For more grammar inspirations, check:

- [TypeScript's grammar](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript-TmLanguage/blob/a771bc4e79deeae81a01d988a273e300290d0072/TypeScript.YAML-tmLanguage)
- [Writing a TextMate Grammar: Some Lessons Learned](https://www.apeth.com/nonblog/stories/textmatebundle.html)

## Snippets

Snippets are also synced from https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-sublime. VSCode snippets docs [here](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/references/contribution-points#contributes.snippets).

## Binary Invocation

We call a few binaries and it's tricky to call them properly cross-platform. Here are some tips:

- We try to call the binaries synchronously to avoid races.
- Make sure you cater to calling a binary and passing e.g. a path with whitespace in it.
- `execFile` and its sync version do the above for free.
- `execFile` does not work on windows for batch scripts, which is what Node scripts are wrapped in. Use `exec`. See more [here](https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/blob/8fcc1ab428b8225c97d2c9a5b8e3a782c70d9439/server/src/utils.ts#L110).
- Thankfully, many of our binaries are native, so we can keep using `execFile` most of the time.

## General Coding Guidance

- `server/` is a standalone folder that can be vendored by e.g. Vim and Sublime Text. Keep it light, don't add deps unless absolutely necessarily, and don't accidentally use a runtime dep from the top level `package.json`.
- This codebase stayed alive by not trying to babysit long-living processes. Be fast, call a binary and shut down.

## Rough Description Of How The Plugin Works

### Editor Diagnostics

They should be synced in from `lib/bs/.compiler.log` build. Don't take them from other places.

### `.compiler.log`

The build output is streamed into `lib/bs/.compiler.log`. Here are its various states, numbered here:

1. Doesn't exist: artifacts not built yet, or cleaned away.
2. Present, without a final line `#Done`: still building.
3. Present, with the final line `#Done`: finished building.

Barring FS errors, there should be no other state to `.compiler.log`. Among others, this means the file is never present but empty.

The compiler log contains exactly the same things you'd see in a regular terminal `bsb` guild, except:

- The errors are indented 2 spaces
- The extra `#Start` and `#Done` (which aren't indented).

A parser for the diagnostics is [here](https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/blob/0dbf2eb9cdb0bd6d95be1aee88b73830feecb5cc/server/src/utils.ts#L129-L329).

### State 1

Artifacts cleaning through `bsb -clean` removes `.compiler.log` and turns into state 1. If that's the case, remove the diagnostics in the editor too. One could argue that they should be kept, but that's misleading UX-wise, and harder to implement correctly.

### Streaming Update of Diagnostics

After saving a file and running the build, the results stream into the log file. Unfortunately, UX-wise, in the editor, this might look like the diagnostics are suddenly gone then coming back in file by file. This looks bad. To remediate:

- If it's in state 2, update those particular files' diagnostics but don't wipe the files' diagnostics yet.
- If in state 3, finish by clean up the rest of the old diagnostics. This means there's a bit of bookeeping needed here. Make sure you get it right. It's possible for a build to be interrupted (and therefore state 4 never reached) and restarted.

Even this fix isn't great. Ideally, the editor's diagnostics can be greyed out while we're updating them...

Keep in mind that you might be tracking multiple `.compiler.log`s. You should do the above for each.

### Stale Diagnostics Detection

To check whether the artifacts are stale, do **not** check `.bsb.lock` at the project root. This is unreliable, since it's possible that `bsb` wasn't running in watcher mode. We also don't want to encourage overuse of the watcher mode, though it seems increasingly common.

We currently do that; we wish we aren't.

<!-- Instead, do `bsb.exe -- -n` -->

### Files from Other Projects

It's possible to open files from different projects into the same editor instance. In that case, also read _that_ file's project's `.compiler.log`.

The bad alternatives are:

- Not show that file's project's errors. That's wrong for several reasons (looks like the file has no error, assumes an editor window has a default project, etc.).
- Show only that file's error. That's just weird, the errors are already read from that project's `.compiler.log`. Might as well show all of them (?).

## Running `bsb` in the Editor

**Don't** do that unless you've prompted the user. This plugin currently prompts the user upon opening thr first the first file of a project. It's not great, but otherwise lots of folks forget to start a `bsb` in the terminal to see the freshest diagnostics.

Drawbacks:

- Running an implicit `bsb -w` means you've acquired the build watch mode lockfile. The user won't be able to run his/her own `bsb -w` in the terminal.
- Running a one-shot `bsb` doesn't conflict, but is a waste. It's also incorrect, as there might be external file system changes you're not detecting, e.g. version control changes.
- The build might be a step in a bigger build. The editor running `bsb -w` by itself might clash with that.
- If you have multiple files with different project roots open, running all of the `bsb -w`s is too intense.

## Format

To find the location of `bsc.exe` to run the formatter:

- Search in the file's directory's `node_modules/bs-platform/{platform}/bsc.exe`. If not found, recursively search upward (because [monorepos](https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/blob/0dbf2eb9cdb0bd6d95be1aee88b73830feecb5cc/server/src/utils.ts#L39-L45)).
  - Do **not** directly use `node_modules/.bin/bsc` if you can help it. That's a Nodejs wrapper. Slow startup. We don't want our formatting to be momentarily stalled because some Nodejs cache went cold.
  - `platform` can be `darwin`, `linux`, `win32` or `freebsd`.

### Formatting Newline

The formatted result should be taken as-is, without any extra string trimming and newline addition/removal by the editor plugin.

### Formatting Errors

The errors returned from `bsc.exe -format` should be discarded; in theory, they should have been duplicates of the errors from `.compiler.log`.

In the future, we should consier showing the format errors when `.compiler.log` isn't found.

## Analysis bin

Analysis bin is what we currently call the OCaml code that does deeper language related analysis, and that powers most of the language specific functionality like hovers, completion, and so on. Here's a list of PRs and other resources you can have a look at if you're interested in contributing to the analysis bin:

- Implementing "code lens" for function definitions. PR + commits have a bunch of comments intended to be educational as to what's done where, and why. https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/pull/513
- Cristiano fixes a bug where autocomplete wasn't working in switch branches, because the analysis did not cover that context. Contains a bunch of good comments on how the test setup works, etc. https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/pull/415

We're happy to gather more resources over time here, including more in-depth getting started guides.

## Release

1. Bump the version to an _even minor_ version number in `package.json` and `server/package.json` and their lockfiles. It's very important that it's an even minor like `1.8.0`, and not `1.7.0`. This is because even minors are reserved for actual releases, and uneven minors for pre-releases. Commit and push the version bump.
2. Make sure @ryyppy is aware of your changes. He needs to sync them over to the vim plugin.
3. Let CI build your version bump commit.
4. Tag the commit with the version number (e.g. `git tag 1.6.0`) and push the tag (e.g. `git push origin 1.6.0`). Another build will trigger, which should automatically:
   - create a `rescript-vscode-<version-number>.vsix` file
   - publish that extension version to the VSCode marketplace
   - create an automatic release on GitHub

If that somehow does not work, you can do the above steps manually:

1. Download the autogenerated `.vsix` from the previous successful CI run, unzip it, and rename it to `rescript-vscode-<version-number>.vsix` (`rescript-vscode-1.3.0.vsix` for example).
2. Go to the appropriate [VSCode Marketplace Publisher](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/manage/publishers/chenglou92), select the three dots next to the extension name, and choose `Update`. Upload your `.vsix` there.
3. Not done! Make a new manual release [here](https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/releases), and make sure you attach the generated `.vsix` onto that new release as well. This is for folks who don't use the VSCode marketplace.

For beta releases, ask folks to try the `.vsix` from CI directly.

Commit message:

Touch ups to LSP and Tools packages (#830)
* name changes and other touch ups

* add sample zero cost variant version of docgen representation

* Polish: LSP and Tools package (#833)

* update ci, readme and contributing.md

* fix

* add Cli.resi and rescript.json

* fixes

* restore some changes

---------

Co-authored-by: Pedro Castro <aspeddro@gmail.com>

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

Thanks for your interest. Below is an informal spec of how the plugin's server communicates with the actual compiler. If you're a ReScript editor plugin implementor, you should probably read this to understand the various important nuances and copy it.

## Repo Structure

```
.
├── client // Language Client. VSCode UI
│   └── src
│       └── extension.ts // Language Client entry point
├── analysis // Native binary powering hover, autocomplete, etc.
│   ├── src
│   └── rescript-editor-analysis.exe // Dev-time analysis binary
├── package.json // The extension manifest
└── server // Language Server. Usable standalone
    ├── src
    │   ├── server.ts // Language Server Module
    │   ├── cli.ts // LSP CLI
    └── analysis_binaries // Prod-time platform-specific analysis binaries
        ├── darwin
        ├── linux
        └── win32
```

## Install Dependencies

- Run `npm install` at the root. This will also install the npm modules for both the `client` and `server` folders.

## Analysis Binary

This is needed for the `analysis` folder, which is native code.

```sh
# If you haven't created the switch, do it. OPAM(https://opam.ocaml.org)
opam switch 4.14.0 # can also create local switch with opam switch create . 4.14.0

# Install dev dependencies from OPAM
opam install . --deps-only

# For IDE support, install the OCaml language server
opam install ocaml-lsp-server
```

## Build & Run

- `npm run compile`. You don't need this if you're developing this repo in VSCode. The compilation happens automatically in the background.
- `cd analysis && make`.

## Test

- Open VS Code to the project root.
- Switch to the Debug viewlet (command palette -> View: Show Run and Debug).
- Select `Client + Server` from the drop down, launch it (green arrow):

  <img width="235" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1909539/97448097-7d186a80-18ed-11eb-82d6-d55b70f54811.png">

  If you're getting some Promise-related error alert: this is a VSCode and/or template bug.

  - If that newly launched VSCode test instance has no project in its explorer view, drag in a random project.
  - Kill all your node processes.
  - Redo the launch.

- In the [Extension Development Host] instance of VSCode that just opened, open a `.res` file.
- Try various features.
- When you make a change, Go to the same Debug viewlet's Call Stack panel and restart the client and the server:

  <img width="359" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1909539/97448639-19db0800-18ee-11eb-875a-d17cd1b141d1.png">

- For the native analysis binary tests: `cd analysis && make test`.

## Change the Grammar

The _real_ source of truth for our grammar is at https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-sublime. We port that `sublime-syntax` grammar over to this weaker TextMate language grammar for VSCode and the rest. There are some subtle differences between the 2 grammars; currently we manually sync between them.

- Modify `grammars/rescript.tmLanguage.json`.

For more grammar inspirations, check:

- [TypeScript's grammar](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript-TmLanguage/blob/a771bc4e79deeae81a01d988a273e300290d0072/TypeScript.YAML-tmLanguage)
- [Writing a TextMate Grammar: Some Lessons Learned](https://www.apeth.com/nonblog/stories/textmatebundle.html)

## Snippets

Snippets are also synced from https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-sublime. VSCode snippets docs [here](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/references/contribution-points#contributes.snippets).

## Binary Invocation

We call a few binaries and it's tricky to call them properly cross-platform. Here are some tips:

- We try to call the binaries synchronously to avoid races.
- Make sure you cater to calling a binary and passing e.g. a path with whitespace in it.
- `execFile` and its sync version do the above for free.
- `execFile` does not work on windows for batch scripts, which is what Node scripts are wrapped in. Use `exec`. See more [here](https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/blob/8fcc1ab428b8225c97d2c9a5b8e3a782c70d9439/server/src/utils.ts#L110).
- Thankfully, many of our binaries are native, so we can keep using `execFile` most of the time.

## General Coding Guidance

- `server/` is a standalone folder that can be vendored by e.g. Vim and Sublime Text. Keep it light, don't add deps unless absolutely necessarily, and don't accidentally use a runtime dep from the top level `package.json`.
- This codebase stayed alive by not trying to babysit long-living processes. Be fast, call a binary and shut down.

## Rough Description Of How The Plugin Works

### Editor Diagnostics

They should be synced in from `lib/bs/.compiler.log` build. Don't take them from other places.

### `.compiler.log`

The build output is streamed into `lib/bs/.compiler.log`. Here are its various states, numbered here:

1. Doesn't exist: artifacts not built yet, or cleaned away.
2. Present, without a final line `#Done`: still building.
3. Present, with the final line `#Done`: finished building.

Barring FS errors, there should be no other state to `.compiler.log`. Among others, this means the file is never present but empty.

The compiler log contains exactly the same things you'd see in a regular terminal `bsb` guild, except:

- The errors are indented 2 spaces
- The extra `#Start` and `#Done` (which aren't indented).

A parser for the diagnostics is [here](https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/blob/0dbf2eb9cdb0bd6d95be1aee88b73830feecb5cc/server/src/utils.ts#L129-L329).

### State 1

Artifacts cleaning through `bsb -clean` removes `.compiler.log` and turns into state 1. If that's the case, remove the diagnostics in the editor too. One could argue that they should be kept, but that's misleading UX-wise, and harder to implement correctly.

### Streaming Update of Diagnostics

After saving a file and running the build, the results stream into the log file. Unfortunately, UX-wise, in the editor, this might look like the diagnostics are suddenly gone then coming back in file by file. This looks bad. To remediate:

- If it's in state 2, update those particular files' diagnostics but don't wipe the files' diagnostics yet.
- If in state 3, finish by clean up the rest of the old diagnostics. This means there's a bit of bookeeping needed here. Make sure you get it right. It's possible for a build to be interrupted (and therefore state 4 never reached) and restarted.

Even this fix isn't great. Ideally, the editor's diagnostics can be greyed out while we're updating them...

Keep in mind that you might be tracking multiple `.compiler.log`s. You should do the above for each.

### Stale Diagnostics Detection

To check whether the artifacts are stale, do **not** check `.bsb.lock` at the project root. This is unreliable, since it's possible that `bsb` wasn't running in watcher mode. We also don't want to encourage overuse of the watcher mode, though it seems increasingly common.

We currently do that; we wish we aren't.

<!-- Instead, do `bsb.exe -- -n` -->

### Files from Other Projects

It's possible to open files from different projects into the same editor instance. In that case, also read _that_ file's project's `.compiler.log`.

The bad alternatives are:

- Not show that file's project's errors. That's wrong for several reasons (looks like the file has no error, assumes an editor window has a default project, etc.).
- Show only that file's error. That's just weird, the errors are already read from that project's `.compiler.log`. Might as well show all of them (?).

## Running `bsb` in the Editor

**Don't** do that unless you've prompted the user. This plugin currently prompts the user upon opening thr first the first file of a project. It's not great, but otherwise lots of folks forget to start a `bsb` in the terminal to see the freshest diagnostics.

Drawbacks:

- Running an implicit `bsb -w` means you've acquired the build watch mode lockfile. The user won't be able to run his/her own `bsb -w` in the terminal.
- Running a one-shot `bsb` doesn't conflict, but is a waste. It's also incorrect, as there might be external file system changes you're not detecting, e.g. version control changes.
- The build might be a step in a bigger build. The editor running `bsb -w` by itself might clash with that.
- If you have multiple files with different project roots open, running all of the `bsb -w`s is too intense.

## Format

To find the location of `bsc.exe` to run the formatter:

- Search in the file's directory's `node_modules/bs-platform/{platform}/bsc.exe`. If not found, recursively search upward (because [monorepos](https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/blob/0dbf2eb9cdb0bd6d95be1aee88b73830feecb5cc/server/src/utils.ts#L39-L45)).
  - Do **not** directly use `node_modules/.bin/bsc` if you can help it. That's a Nodejs wrapper. Slow startup. We don't want our formatting to be momentarily stalled because some Nodejs cache went cold.
  - `platform` can be `darwin`, `linux`, `win32` or `freebsd`.

### Formatting Newline

The formatted result should be taken as-is, without any extra string trimming and newline addition/removal by the editor plugin.

### Formatting Errors

The errors returned from `bsc.exe -format` should be discarded; in theory, they should have been duplicates of the errors from `.compiler.log`.

In the future, we should consier showing the format errors when `.compiler.log` isn't found.

## Analysis bin

Analysis bin is what we currently call the OCaml code that does deeper language related analysis, and that powers most of the language specific functionality like hovers, completion, and so on. Here's a list of PRs and other resources you can have a look at if you're interested in contributing to the analysis bin:

- Implementing "code lens" for function definitions. PR + commits have a bunch of comments intended to be educational as to what's done where, and why. https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/pull/513
- Cristiano fixes a bug where autocomplete wasn't working in switch branches, because the analysis did not cover that context. Contains a bunch of good comments on how the test setup works, etc. https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/pull/415

We're happy to gather more resources over time here, including more in-depth getting started guides.

## Releasing the VSCode extension and standalone LSP package

_This below will automatically release the LSP package as well._

1. Bump the version to an _even minor_ version number in `package.json` and `server/package.json` and their lockfiles. It's very important that it's an even minor like `1.8.0`, and not `1.7.0`. This is because even minors are reserved for actual releases, and uneven minors for pre-releases. Commit and push the version bump.
2. Make sure @ryyppy is aware of your changes. He needs to sync them over to the vim plugin.
3. Let CI build your version bump commit.
4. Tag the commit with the version number (e.g. `git tag 1.6.0`) and push the tag (e.g. `git push origin 1.6.0`). Another build will trigger, which should automatically:
   - create a `rescript-vscode-<version-number>.vsix` file
   - publish that extension version to the VSCode marketplace
   - create an automatic release on GitHub

If that somehow does not work, you can do the above steps manually:

1. Download the autogenerated `.vsix` from the previous successful CI run, unzip it, and rename it to `rescript-vscode-<version-number>.vsix` (`rescript-vscode-1.3.0.vsix` for example).
2. Go to the appropriate [VSCode Marketplace Publisher](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/manage/publishers/chenglou92), select the three dots next to the extension name, and choose `Update`. Upload your `.vsix` there.
3. Not done! Make a new manual release [here](https://github.com/rescript-lang/rescript-vscode/releases), and make sure you attach the generated `.vsix` onto that new release as well. This is for folks who don't use the VSCode marketplace.

For beta releases, ask folks to use the pre-release version installable from the VSCode Marketplace.

## Releasing the `@rescript/tools` package

The tools package is released by bumping the version in `tools/package.json`, running `npm i` in the `tools/` folder, and then pushing those changes with the commit message `publish tools`.
